TITLE

	Grey-Listing Optimisations for Electronic Mail Filtering

INVENTORS

	Anthony C. Howe, Cannes, France;
	Fort Systems Ltd, Washington DC, USA

REFERNCES

	RFC 2821 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), J. Klensin
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2821.txt?number=2821

	RFC 1035 Domain Names (DNS) - Implementation And
	Specification, P. Mockapetris
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1035.txt?number=1035

	The Next Step in the Spam Control War: Greylisting
	Evan Harris, 2003
	http://projects.puremagic.com/greylisting/whitepaper.html

	milter-gris, Anthony C. Howe
	http://www.snertsoft.com/sendmail/milter-gris/

	Grey-Listing Web Site; collection of articles, references,
	forums 	http://www.greylisting.org/

	Sender Policy Framework (SPF) for Authorizing Use of Domains
	in E-Mail, Version 1; M. Wong & W. Schlitt
	http://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4408.txt

	Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR)
	http://public.pacbell.net/dedicated/cidr.html
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1517.txt?number=1517
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1518.txt?number=1518
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1519.txt?number=1519
	http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc1520.txt?number=1520

ABSTRACT

	Grey-Listing Optimisations addresses the problem of repeated
	delays in the delivery of electronic mail, primarily from mail
	systems that use a pool of mail servers that share a mail
	queue. It does this with more flexible and improved
	possibilities in the form of key tuples used in grey-listing
	records.

TERMS

	OGL = original grey-listing as outlined by Evan Harris

	MTA = mail transfer agent handles routing and delivery of
	mail from a local site to one or more remote sites.

	SMTP = Simple Mail Transfer Protocol defined by RFC 2821.

	AS = Antonymous System number used in network routing

BACKGROUND OF THE INVENTION

1. Field of the Invention

	This invention relates to the filtering of electronic mail
	messages (email) using the filtering method know as grey-
	listing.

2. Description of Related Art

	The Internet is a huge communications medium that provides its
	users a convenient, fast, and inexpensive means to pass email
	messages to one or more users around the globe. In many cases
	it has replaced the physical postal service. As result of its
	popularity, advertisers and thieves have turned to using email
	as a means to promote products with unsolicited commercial or
	bulk email, and steal information with email born worms and
	viruses. These undesirable junk email messages are often
	collectively referred to as "spam".

	The problem of spam has escalated to pandemic proportions and
	threatens every email provider's ability to deliver regular
	email to their users, consuming time and resources to correct.
	As a result, many email providers deploy on their mail systems
	policy, behavioural, and/or content based filtering methods.

	The original grey-listing (OGL) method is a behavioural filter
	that takes advantage of SMTP procedures defined in RFC 2821 by
	temporarily rejecting email from an unknown source in order to
	determine if that source implements a retry queue. This is
	based on the assumption that junk mail systems are typically
	implemented with speed and volume in mind, rather than
	reliability. As such they do not implement mail retry queues.
	If email from a previously refused source returns within a
	certain time frame, then it is permitted to pass.

	This invention addresses two problems concerning the OGL
	method:

	The first concerns a common problem with OGL is that some
	sending sites use a pool of mail servers with a shared mail
	queue (gmail.com is one such site), such that mail queue
	retries will appear to come from constantly changing IP
	addresses. This has a negative impact on recipient sites using
	the OGL key tuple of {client-IP, sender, recipient}. The
	receiving site using OGL constantly sees a different IP
	address, but with the same sender and recipient. This results
	in the receiving site grey-listing and delaying the message
	multiple times, some times resulting in the message not being
	delivered.

	The second problem concerns additional and unnecessary grey-
	listing delays when using the OGL method. Grey-listing as an
	anti-spam technique asks a single question: does the sending
	mail server implement a mail retry queue? Many traditional
	grey-listing implementations cache each and every unique
	{client-IP, sender, recipient} tuple, only allowing repeat
	visits from the same tuple to pass without delay. However,
	once it is determined that a sending mail server implements a
	retry queue, new mail from the same machine, but from
	different senders and/or to different recipients will result
	in additional and unnecessary grey-listing delays.

3. Description of Prior Art

	Some grey-listing implementations have attempted to address
	these issues.

	One technique in use will convert the cache key tuple of a
	successful connection from {client-IP, sender, recipient} to
	{client-IP/24}, ie. white list all the machines in the /24
	subnet the client IP is a member of. While this will often
	resolve both problems mentioned above, the assumption is too
	broad and imprecise. It is often the case that unrelated mail
	sources share the same net block. Past are the days when
	Internet providers assigned whole /24 to each customer they
	hosted. Now IPv4 addresses are rationed out in smaller
	subnets. It is very possible to have spam sources appear as
	neighbouring machines within the same /24 subnet.

	The OpenBSD's grey-listing implementation takes a more
	conservative view. It converts a successful cache key tuple to
	just the {client-IP} of the machine that is known to implement
	a retry queue. This solves the second problem of unnecessary
	delays, but doesn't address the first concerning mail server
	pools.

SUMMARY OF THE INVENTION

	Our invention is two fold:

	First it allows the mail system administrator the ability to
	chose the attributes of the key tuple used for storage and
	retrieval of grey-listing records. These attributes are
	derived from information concerning the SMTP transaction, such
	SMTP client's network details and/or SMTP command arguments
	other than MAIL FROM: and RCPT TO:. Different key tuples will
	have different effects on how grey-listing behaves.

	In our implementation we experimented with five types of
	attributes: client IP address, client PTR information, HELO or
	EHLO argument, MAIL FROM: argument (sender), and the RCPT TO:
	argument (recipient). While some combinations will be better
	than others, the choice should be available to the mail system
	administrator.

	For example, weakening the OGL key tuple to consist only of
	{sender, recipient} helps address the problem of mail server
	pools. However, it can be overly broad in that it allows mail
	for the same sender and recipient pair to come from anywhere
	on the Internet.

	The second part of our invention concerns the specific
	treatment of a key tuple that uses the client PTR information
	obtained from the domain name system (DNS) based on the IP
	address of the connected SMTP client; a PTR record maps an IP
	address to a host name. The client PTR record allows for a
	more interesting key tuple of the form {trimmed-PTR, sender,
	recipient}.

	If the PTR record is not defined, is a multi-homed PTR for
	multiple domains, or has IP-in-PTR references, we fall back on
	using the IP address as in the OGL method with the
	optimisation for already known IP addresses mentioned above.

	With the client host name, taking care with special cases
	related to domain-as-host-name and two level country domains,
	we remove the first label from the host name, which should
	leave us with the client's domain name or a subdomain. This
	trimmed PTR information is then used in placed of the client
	IP address of the key tuple, ie. {trimmed-PTR, sender,
	recipient}. The effect of this simple change is that we grey-
	list the sender's pool of mail servers more precisely by
	domain name or subdomain, instead of a single machine or
	subnet.

	When a SMTP client later retries to send the message and
	connects to us from a different member of their mail pool, we
	will successful find our cached record for {trimmed-PTR,
	sender, recipient} and convert the key tuple to just {trimmed-
	PTR} to pass through without delay future mail from the same
	group of machines.

	For example, consider a sender site like:

	    out1.pool1.sender.com	192.0.2.1
	    out2.pool1.sender.com	192.0.2.2
	    out3.pool1.sender.com	192.0.2.3
	    out4.pool1.sender.com	192.0.2.4

	Using the OGL tuple of {client-IP, sender, recipient}, the
	first time the sending site connects, the receiver will record
	in their grey-list cache:

	    { 192.0.2.3, fred@sender.com, john@receiver.com }

	and temporarily reject the mail. When the sending site
	retries, the receiver will likely see a different connecting
	client IP address and record a new key tuple:

	    { 192.0.2.1, fred@sender.com, john@receiver.com }

	and temporarily reject the mail once again. This process can
	repeat itself for as many times as there are machines in the
	sending pool of servers, resulting in excessive mail delivery
	delays and sometimes non-delivery depending on cache times and
	retry intervals.

	Using our invention, if the sender connects from IP address
	192.0.2.3 which has a PTR of out3.pool1.sender.com, then the
	receiver would use the trimmed PTR information to record the
	following grey-list tuple the first time the sender attempts
	to deliver the message:

	    { pool1.sender.com, fred@sender.com, john@receiver.com }

	and temporarily reject the message. The next time the sending
	site connects to the receiver, no matter from which machine
	within the same pool, the trimmed PTR information will match
	the previously cached record key and result in the mail being
	passed through grey-listing. We then convert the cache key
	tuple of the successful sender to:

	    { pool1.sender.com }

	And so allow us to pass all future mail from this pool of mail
	servers without unnecessary delays.

BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE DRAWINGS

	Figure 1 background information outlining a normal SMTP
	transaction without grey-listing.

	Figure 2 shows an SMTP transaction using the original grey-
	listing method.

	Figure 3 is similar to figure 2, but shows where alternative,
	customisable grey-listing keys would be applied.

	Figure 4 shows a modified section of figure 2 when using the
	client PTR information for grey-listing.


DESCRIPTION

	A mail system will consist of one or more mail servers that
	accept submissions, transfer, filter, and store email.
	Different organisations will have different levels of
	sophistication in their mail system configurations.

	Almost all Internet mail make use of RFC 2821 Simple Mail
	Transfer Protocol (SMTP) to pass messages between two mail
	systems. Figure 1 shows what an ordinary successful SMTP
	transaction would look like.

	RFC 2821 section 4.5.4 explains the need for a "mail retry
	queue", where email is stored until it can be transferred to
	its destination. Most spam sources send out huge volumes of
	junk and/or virus infected mail and so do not implement mail
	retry queues, because speed and volume are often more
	important to them than reliability; what's the loss of one
	failed message when millions are being sent.

	Figure 2 shows where the original grey-listing method is
	applied in the SMTP transaction. For each RCPT TO: command
	(7), the OGL would lookup in some storage medium a key tuple
	consisting of the client IP address, the sender address, and
	recipient address (50).

	If the key was not found, then add a new record using the key
	and a timestamp value (51, 53) of when the record was added.
	Reply to the RCPT TO: command with a temporary failure result
	(54).

	If the key is found, but the grey-list period has not expired
	then reply to the RCPT TO: command with a temporary failure
	result (52, 54). The grey-list period prevents an unknown
	simply repeating the same RCPT TO: command or disconnecting
	and immediately reconnecting to try again.

	Otherwise the key was found and the grey-list period has
	expired, then reply to the RCPT TO: command with a 250 OK
	result (8) allowing that message to proceed for that sender
	and recipient pair.

	The above outlines the original grey-listing method used in
	prior art. In Figure 3 we show where part of our invention
	replaces step 50 with 60, which is a pre-selected choice of
	grey-listing key tuple to use throughout. Part of our
	invention consists of offering a configurable choice of
	attributes used to compose the key tuple. These attributes are
	derived from either the client IP address and/or other SMTP
	commands used during the SMTP transaction.

	Our invention offers a choice of key tuple attributes such as
	the client PTR information, which is found using a DNS lookup
	for a PTR record which are used to map IP addresses to host
	names. Other attributes can be the HELO or EHLO argument
	supplied by the SMTP client; the argument of an SMTP AUTH
	command; or parameters specified with the MAIL FROM: command
	like SIZE or AUTH in addition to the sender address. The
	ability to use different attributes will result in slightly
	different behaviour as to when and how grey-listing is
	applied.

	For example, one implemention of our invention offers key
	tuple attributes: client IP, client PTR, HELO, MAIL (sender),
	and RCPT (recipient). The OGL method specifies, {IP, MAIL,
	RCPT} which is problematic with mail server pools sharing a
	common mail queue, but a trivial change to the key tuple to
	use only {MAIL, RCPT} attributes provides another solution to
	the problem of a mail server pool.

	In the other part of our invention, we use the client host
	name, found through a DNS PTR lookup using the client IP
	address, as a key attribute. Figure 4 shows how it can be
	applied.

	The client host name sometimes does not exist (80) or should
	not be used in certain situations such as when the PTR record
	is "multi-homed" and the resulting list of host names maps to
	many different domain names (81), or when the host name is
	composed from parts of the client IP address typically
	assigned by Internet service providers (ISP) to residential or
	dynamic IP blocks (82) which should only send mail via their
	ISP. In such cases we fall back on the using the client IP
	address (84).

	When client host name is suitable to use, we modify it by
	removing the leading label only when the domain name is not
	used as the host name of a machine. Otherwise we use it as is.
	We can then perform a grey-list lookup consisting of the
	trimmed-PTR (85) or the client IP address (84).

	If the record exists we can proceed go to step 52 to see if
	the record is still within the grey-list period.

	If steps 84 or 85 do not find a record, then we append the
	other attributes of the predefined grey-list key tuple to
	lookup a key tuple with the client IP address (88) or trimmed
	PTR (89) as one of the attributes.

	The effect of using the trimmed-PTR information in steps 85
	and 89, allows our invention to identify a group of mail
	servers by a common domain or subdomain name and in so doing
	avoid unnecessary delays in mail delivery.

	From here the logic is much the same as in Figure 2, with the
	exception of step 90. If the grey-list period is over, we can
	reduce the key tuple to the first element of the tuple, which
	would be either the client IP address or trimmed-PTR. This
	step combined with steps 84 and 85 allow grey-listing to be
	skipped once a SMTP client has demonstrated the existence of a
	retry queue and so avoid unnecessary delays when any of the
	other key tuple attributes change. The additional key tuple
	attributes help identify a machine or group of machines and a
	conversation. Once the SMTP client has shown it uses a mail
	retry queue, the other attributes of the key only serve to
	hinder more than help.


CLAIMS

	The embodiments of the invention in which an exclusive
	property or privilege is claimed are defined as follows:

    1.	Storing and retrieving grey-listing record keys consisting
	of:

    	    -	configurable combinations of attributes related to
		the known and/or derivable details of an electronic
		mail transaction

	    -	excluding the specific combination found in prior art
	    	of client IP address, MAIL FROM: address, and RCPT TO:
	    	address

	    -	excluding the specific combination found in prior art
	    	of just	the client IP address or portion thereof, ie.
	    	a subnet specification.

    2.	Grey-listing record keys of claim 1 composed from one or more
	of:

	    -	SMTP client network information that can be derived
		from its IP address and connection details, ie. PTR
		records, NS records, passive OS finger-printing, AS
		number, WHOIS data, etc.

	    -	sender information derived from MAIL FROM: argument,
		ie. MX records, NS records, TXT records, WHOIS data,
		etc.

	    -	SMTP command arguments in whole or in part, ie. HELO
		or EHLO argument, AUTH arguments, STARTTLS details,
		MAIL FROM: argument and/or parameters, etc.

    3.	A process for grey-listing record keys specifically using
	client PTR information includes:

    	    -	a means to permit mail server pools sharing a common
    	    	mail queue to be identified and grey-listed only once

    	    - 	a means to allow mail systems that have demonstrated
    	    	the use of a mail retry queue at least once, to avoid
    	    	subsequent delays of future mail with different email
    	    	characteristics.












